{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red25\green28\blue31;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww25100\viewh15700\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \
What is Data Science:\
\
Data Science is a process, not an event. It is the process of using data to understand different things, to understand the world. For me is when you have a model or hypothesis of a problem, and you try to validate that hypothesis or model with your data. Data science is the art of uncovering the insights and trends that are hiding behind data. It's when you translate data into a story. So use storytelling to generate insight. And with these insights, you can make strategic choices for a company or an institution. Data science is a field about processes and systems to extract data from various forms of whether it is unstructured or structured form. Data science is the study of data. Like biological sciences is a study of biology, physical sciences, it's the study of physical reactions. Data is real, data has real properties, and we need to study them if we're going to work on them. Data Science involves data and some science. The definition or the name came up in the 80s and 90s when some professors were looking into the statistics curriculum, and they thought it would be better to call it data science. But what is Data Science? I'd see data science as one's attempt to work with data, to find answers to questions that they are exploring. In a nutshell, it's more about data than it is about science. If you have data, and you have curiosity, and you're working with data, and you're manipulating it, you're exploring it, the very exercise of going through analyzing data, trying to get some answers from it is data science. Data science is relevant today because we have tons of data available. We used to worry about lack of data. Now we have a data deluge. In the past, we didn't have algorithms, now we have algorithms. In the past, the software was expensive, now it's open source and free. In the past, we couldn't store large amounts of data, now for a fraction of the cost, we can have gazillions of datasets for a very low cost. So, the tools to work with data, the very availability of data, and the ability to store and analyze data, it's all cheap, it's all available, it's all ubiquitous, it's here. There's never been a better time to be a data scientist.\
\
Fundamentals of data science:\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\qj\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Everyone you ask will give you a slightly\
different description of what Data Science is, but most people agree that it has a significant\
data analysis component. Data analysis isn't new. What is new is the vast quantity of data\
available from massively varied sources: from log files, email, social media, sales data,\
patient information files, sports performance data, sensor data, security cameras, and many\
more besides. At the same time that there is more data available than ever, we have\
the computing power needed to make a useful analysis and reveal new knowledge.\
Data science can help organizations understand their environments, analyze existing issues,\
and reveal previously hidden opportunities. Data scientists use data analysis to add to\
the knowledge of the organization by investigating data, exploring the best way to use it to\
provide value to the business. So, what is the process of data science? Many\
organizations will use data science to focus on a specific problem, and so it's essential\
to clarify the question that the organization wants answered. This first and most crucial\
step defines how the data science project progresses. Good data scientists are curious\
people who ask questions to clarify the business need.\
The next questions are: "what data do we need to solve the problem, and where will that\
data come from?". Data scientists can analyze structured and unstructured data from many\
sources, and depending on the nature of the problem, they can choose to analyze the data\
in different ways. Using multiple models to explore the data reveals patterns and outliers;\
sometimes, this will confirm what the organization suspects, but sometimes it will be completely\
new knowledge, leading the organization to a new approach.\
When the data has revealed its insights, the role of the data scientist becomes that of\
a storyteller, communicating the results to the project stakeholders. Data scientists\
can use powerful data visualization tools to help stakeholders understand the nature\
of the results, and the recommended action to take.\
Data Science is changing the way we work; it's changing the way we use data and it\'92s\
changing the way organisations understand the world.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
The many paths of Data Science:\
\
[SOUND] [MUSIC] Data science didn't really\
exist when I was growing up. It's not something that I ever woke up and said, I want to be a data\
scientist when I grow up. No, it didn't exist. I didn't know I would be\
working in data science. When I grew up, there isn't\
that field called data science. And I think it's really new. Data science didn't exist until 2009,\
2011. Someone like DJ Patil or\
Andrew Gelman coined the term. Before that, there was statistics. And I didn't want to be any of those. I want to be in business. And then I found data science\
a heck of a lot more interesting. I studied statistics,\
that's how I started. I went through many different stages in\
my life where I wanted to be a singer and then a doctor. And then I realized that\
I was good at math. So I chose an area that was\
focused on quantitative analysis. And from then I do think that\
I wanted to work with data. Not necessarily data science\
as it's known today. The first time that I had\
contact with data science, when I was my first year as\
a mechanical engineering. And strategic consulting firms,\
they use data science to make decisions. So it was my first contact\
with data science. I had a complicated problem\
that I needed to solve, and the usual techniques that we had at\
that time couldn't help with that problem. I graduated with a math degree\
in the worst possible time, right after the economic crisis, and you\
actually had to be useful to get a job. So I went and got a degree in statistics. And then I worked enough jobs that\
were called data scientist that I suddenly became one. My undergraduate degree was in\
business, and I majored in politics, philosophy, and economics. And then I did a masters\
in business analytics at New York University at\
the Stern School of Business. When I left my undergrad,\
the first company I joined, it turned out that they were analyzing electronic point\
of sale data for retail manufacturers. And what we were doing was data science. But we only really started\
using that term much later. In fact, I'd say four or five years ago is\
when we started calling it analytics and data science. I had several options for\
my internship here in Canada. And one of the options was\
to work with data science. I used to work with project development. But I think that was a good choice. And then I start my\
internship with data science. I'm a civil engineer by training,\
so all engineers work with data. I would say the conventional use of data science in my life started\
with transportation research. I started building large models trying\
to forecast traffic on streets, trying to determine congestion and greenhouse\
gas emissions or tailpipe emissions. So I think that's where my start was. And I started building these models\
when I was a graduate student at the University of Toronto. Started working with very large data sets,\
looking at household samples of, say, 150,000 households\
from half a million trips. And that, too,\
I'm speaking from mid 90s when this was supposed to be a very large data set,\
but not in today's terms. But that's how I started. I continued working with it. And then I moved to McGill University\
where I was a professor of transportation engineering. And I built even bigger data models\
that involved data and analytics. And so I would say, yes, transportation\
research brought me to data science. [MUSIC]\
\
\
Advice for new Data Scientist:\
\
[Music] My advice to an aspiring data scientist is to be curious, extremely argumentative and judgmental. Curiosity is absolute must. If you're not curious, you would not know what to do with the data. Judgmental because if you do not have preconceived notions about things you wouldn't know where to begin with. Argumentative because if you can argument and if you can plead a case, at least you can start somewhere and then you learn from data and then you modify your assumptions and hypotheses and your data would help you learn. And you may start at the wrong point. You may say that I thought I believed this, but now with data I know this. So, this allows you a learning process. So, curiosity being able to take a position, strong position, and then moving forward with it. The other thing that the data scientist [should] would need is some comfort and flexibility with analytics platforms: some software, some computing platform, but that's secondary. The most important thing is curiosity and the ability to take positions. Once you have done that, once you've analyzed, then you've got some answers. And that's the last thing that a data scientist need, and that is the ability to tell a story. That once you have your analytics, once you have your tabulations, now you should be able to tell a great story from it. Because if you don't tell a great story from it, your findings will remain hidden, remain buried, nobody would know. Your rise to prominence is pretty much relying on your ability to tell great stories. A starting point would be to see what is your competitive advantage. Do you want to be a data scientist in any field or a specific field? Because, let's say you want to be a data scientist and work for an IT firm or a web-based or Internet based firm, then you need a different set of skills. And if you want to be a data scientist, for lets say, in the health industry, then you need different sets of skills. So figure out first what you're interested, and what is your competitive advantage. Your competitive advantage is not necessarily going to be your analytical skills. Your competitive advantage is your understanding of some aspect of life where you exceed beyond others in understanding that. Maybe it's film, maybe it's retail, maybe it's health, maybe it's computers. Once you've figured out where your expertise lies, then you start acquiring analytical skills. What platforms to learn and those platforms, those tools would be specific to the industry that you're interested in. And then once you have got some proficiency in the tools, the next thing would be to apply your skills to real problems, and then tell the rest of the world what you can do with it. [Music]\
\
\
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 Data Science: The Sexiest Job in the 21st Century:\
\
\
\pard\tx566\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 In the data-driven world, data scientists have emerged as a hot commodity. The chase is on to find the best talent in data science. Already, experts estimate that millions of jobs in data science might remain vacant for the lack of readily available talent. The global search for skilled data scientists is not merely a search for statisticians or computer scientists. In fact, the firms are searching for well-rounded individuals who possess the subject matter expertise, some experience in software programming and analytics, and exceptional communication skills.\
Our digital footprint has expanded rapidly over the past 10 years. The size of the digital universe was roughly 130 billion gigabytes in 1995. By 2020, this number will swell to 40 trillion gigabytes. Companies will compete for hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of new workers needed to navigate the digital world. No wonder the prestigious Harvard Business Review called data science\'a0
\b the sexiest job in the 21st century
\b0 .\
A report by the McKinsey Global Institute warns of huge talent shortages for data and analytics. By 2018, the United States alone could face a shortage of 140,000 to 190,000 people with deep analytical skills as well as 1.5 million managers and analysts with the know-how to use the analysis of big data to make effective decisions.\
Because the digital revolution has touched every aspect of our lives, the opportunity to benefit from learning about our behaviors is more so now than ever before. Given the right data, marketers can take sneak peeks into our habit formation. Research in neurology and psychology is revealing how habits and preferences are formed and retailers like Target are out to profit from it. However, the retailers can only do so if they have data scientists working for them. "For this reason, it is like an arms race to hire statisticians nowadays", said Andreas Weigend, the former chief scientist at Amazon.com.\
There is still the need to convince the C-suite executives of the benefits of data and analytics. It appears that the senior management might be a step or two behind the middle management in being informed of the potential of analytics-driven planning. Professor Peter Fader, who manages the Customer Analytics Initiative at Wharton, knows that executives reach the C-suite without having to interact with data. He believes that the real change will happen when executives are well-versed in data and analytics.\
SAP, a leader in data and analytics, reported from a survey that 92% of the responding firms in its sample experienced a significant increase in their data holdings. At the same time, three-quarters identified the need for new data science skills in their firms. Accenture believes that the demand for data scientists may outstrip supply by 250,000 in 2015 alone. A similar survey of 150 executives by KPMG in 2014 found that 85% of the respondents did not know how to analyze data.\'a0
\i Most organizations are unable to connect the dots because they do not fully understand how data and analytics can transform their business,
\i0 \'a0Alwin Magimay, head of digital and analytics for KPMG UK, said in an interview in May 2015.\
Bernard Marr writing for Forbes also raises concerns about the insufficient analytics talent.\'a0
\i There just aren't enough people with the required skills to analyze and interpret this information-transforming it from raw numerical (or other) data into actionable insights-the ultimate aim of any Big Data-driven initiative,
\i0 \'a0he wrote. Bernard quotes a survey by Gartner of business leaders of whom more than 50% reported the lack of in-house expertise in data science.\
Bernard reported on Walmart, which turned to crowd-sourcing for its analytics need. Walmart approached Kaggle to host a competition for analyzing its proprietary data. The retailer provided sales data from a shortlist of stores and asked the competitors to develop better forecasts of sales based on promotion schemes.\
Given the shortage of data scientists, employers are willing to pay top dollars for the talent. Michael Chui, a principal at McKinsey, knows this too well. "Data science has become relevant to every company ... There's a war for this type of talent," he said in an interview. Take Paul Minton, for example. He was making $20,000 serving tables at a restaurant. He had majored in math at college. Mr. Minton took a three-month programming course that changed everything. He made over $100,000 in 2014 as a data scientist for a web startup in San Francisco.\'a0
\i Six figures, right off the bat ... To me, it was astonishing,
\i0 \'a0said Mr Minton.\
Could Mr Minton be exceptionally fortunate, or are such high salaries the norm? Luck had little to do with it; the New York Times reported $100,000 as the average base salary of a software engineer and $112,000 for data scientists.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
A day in the life of Data Scientist:\
\
[Music] I've built a recommendation engine before, as part of a large organization and worked through all types of engineers and accounted for different parts of the problem. It's one of the ones I'm most happy with because ultimately, I came up with a very simple solution that was easy to understand from all levels, from the executives to the engineers and developers. Ultimately, it was just as efficient as something really complex, and they could have spent a lot more time on. Back in the university, we have a problem that we wanted to predict algae blooms. This algae blooms could cause a rise in toxicity of the water and it could cause problems through the water treatment company. We couldn't like predict with our chemical engineering background. So we use artificial neural networks to predict when these blooms will reoccur. So the water treatment companies could better handle this problem. In Toronto, the public transit is operated by Toronto Transit Commission. We call them TTC. It's one of the largest transit authorities in the region, in North America. And one day they contacted me and said, "We have a problem." And I said, "Okay, what's the problem?" They said, "Well, we have complaints data, and we would like to analyze it, and we need your help." I said, "Fine I would be very happy to help." So I said, "How many complaints do you have?" They said, "A few." I said, "How many?" Maybe half a million. I said, "Well, let's start working with it." So I got the data and I started analyzing it. So, basically, they have done a great job of keeping some data in tabular format that was unstructured data. And in that case, tabular data was when the complaint arrived, who received it, what was the type of the complaint, was it resolved, whose fault was it. And the unstructured part of it was the exchange of e-mails and faxes. So, imagine looking at how half a million exchanges of e-mails and trying to get some answers from it. So I started working with it. The first thing I wanted to know is why would people complain and is there a pattern or is there some days when there are more complaints than others? And I had looked at the data and I analyzed it in all different formats, and I couldn't find [what] the impetus for complaints being higher on a certain day and lower on others. And it continued for maybe a month or so. And then, one day I was getting off the bus in Toronto, and I was still thinking about it. And I stepped out without looking on the ground, and I stepped into a puddle, puddle of water. And now, I was sort of ankle deep into water, and it was just one foot wet and the other dry. And I was extremely annoyed. And I was walking back and then it hit me, and I said, "Well, wait a second. Today it rained unexpectedly, and I wasn't prepared for it. That's why I'm wet, and I wasn't looking for it." What if there was a relationship between extreme weather and the type of complaints TTC receives? So I went to the environment Canada's website, and I got data on rain and precipitation, wind and the light. And there, I found something very interesting. The 10 most excessive days for complaints. The 10 days where people complain the most were the days when the weather was bad. It was unexpected rain, an extreme drop in temperature, too much snow, very windy day. So I went back to the TTC's executives and I said, "I've got good news and bad news." And the good news is, I know why people would complain excessively on certain days. I know the reason for it. The bad news is, there's nothing you can do about it. [Music]\
\
Old problems, new problems, Data Science Solutions:\
\
[Music] Organizations can leverage the almost unlimited\
amount of data now available to them in a growing number of ways. However, all organizations ultimately use\
data science for the same reason\'97to discover optimum solutions to existing problems. Let\'92s take a look at three examples of data\
science providing innovative solutions for old problems. In transport, Uber collects real-time user\
data to discover how many drivers are available, if more are needed, and if they should allow\
a surge charge to attract more drivers. Uber uses data to put the right number of\
drivers in the right place, at the right time, for a cost the rider is willing to pay. In a different transport related data science\
effort, the Toronto Transportation Commission has made great strides in solving an old problem\
with traffic flows, restructuring those flows in and around the city. Using data science tools and analysis, they\
have: Gathered data to better understand streetcar\
operations, and identify areas for interventions Analyzed customer complaints data,\
Used probe data to better understand traffic performance on main routes and\
created a team to better capitalize on big data for both planning, operations and evaluation By focusing on peak hour clearances and identifying\
the most congested routes, monthly hours lost for commuters due to traffic congestion dropped\
from 4.75 hrs. in 2010 to 3 hrs. in mid-2014. In facing issues in our environment, data\
science can also play a proactive role. Freshwater lakes supply a variety of human\
and ecological needs, such as providing drinking water and producing food. But lakes across the world are threatened\
by increasing incidences of harmful cyanobacterial blooms. There are many projects and studies to solve\
this long-existing dilemma. In the US, a team of scientists from research\
centers stretching from Maine to South Carolina is developing and deploying high-tech tools\
to explore cyanobacteria in lakes across the east coast. The team is using robotic boats, buoys, and\
camera-equipped drones to measure physical, chemical, and biological data in lakes where\
cyanobacteria are detected, collecting large volumes of data related to the lakes and the\
development of the harmful blooms. The project is also building new algorithmic\
models to assess the findings. The information collected will lead to better\
predictions of when and where cyanobacterial blooms take place, enabling proactive approaches\
to protect public health in recreational lakes and in those that supply drinking water. Such interdisciplinary training prepares the\
next generation of scientists to address societal issues with the proper modernized data science\
tools. It takes gathering a lot of data, cleaning\
and preparing it, and then analyzing it to gain the insight needed to develop better\
solutions for today's enterprises. How do you get a better solution that is efficient? You must:\
Identify the problem and establish a clear understanding of it. Gather the data for analysis. Identify the right tools to use, and develop a data strategy. Case studies are also helpful in customizing\
a potential solution. Once these conditions exist and available\
data is extracted, you can develop a machine learning model. It will take time for an organization to refine\
best practices for data strategy using data science, but the benefits are worth it. [Music]\
\
Data Science Topics and Algorithms:\
\
[Music] I really enjoy regression. I'd say regression was maybe one of the\
first concepts that I, that really helped me understand data so I enjoy\
regression. I really like data visualization. I think it's a key element\
for people to get across their message to people that don't understand that\
well what data science is. Artificial neural networks. I'm really passionate about neural networks\
because we have a lot to learn with nature so when we are trying to mimic our, our brain\
I think that we can do some applications with this behavior with this biological behavior\
in algorithms. Data visualization with R. I love to do this. Nearest neighbor. It's the simplest but it just gets the best\
results so many more times than some overblown, overworked algorithm that's just as likely\
to overfit as it is to make a good fit. So structured data is more like tabular data\
things that you\'92re familiar with in Microsoft Excel format. You've got rows and columns and that's called\
structured data. Unstructured data is basically data that is\
coming from mostly from web where it's not tabular. It is not, it's not in rows and columns. It's text. It's sometimes it's video and audio, so you\
would have to deploy more sophisticated algorithms to extract data. And in fact, a lot of times we take unstructured\
data and spend a great deal of time and effort to get some structure out of it and then analyze\
it. So if you have something which fits nicely\
into tables and columns and rows, go ahead. That's your structured data. But if you see if it's a weblog or if you're\
trying to get information out of webpages and you've got a gazillion web pages, that's\
unstructured data that would require a little bit more effort to get information out of\
it. There are thousands of books written on regression\
and millions of lectures delivered on regression. And I always feel that they don\'92t do a good\
job of explaining regression because they get into data and models and statistical distributions. Let's forget about it. Let me explain regression in the simplest\
possible terms. If you have ever taken a cab ride, a taxi\
ride, you understand regression. Here is how it works. The moment you sit in a cab ride, in a cab,\
you see that there's a fixed amount there. It says $2.50. You, rather the cab, moves or you get off. This is what you owe to the driver the moment\
you step into a cab. That's a constant. You have to pay that amount if you have stepped\
into a cab. Then as it starts moving for every meter or\
hundred meters the fare increases by certain amount. So there's a... there's a fraction, there's\
a relationship between distance and the amount you would pay above and beyond that constant. And if you're not moving and you're stuck\
in traffic, then every additional minute you have to pay more. So as the minutes increase, your fare increases. As the distance increases, your fare increases. And while all this is happening you've already\
paid a base fare which is the constant. This is what regression is. Regression tells you what the base fare is\
and what is the relationship between time and the fare you have paid, and the distance\
you have traveled and the fare you've paid. Because in the absence of knowing those relationships,\
and just knowing how much people traveled for and how much they paid, regression allows\
you to compute that constant that you didn't know. That it was $2.50, and it would compute the relationship\
between the fare and and the distance and the fare and the time. That is regression. [Music]\
\
Cloud for Data Science:\
\
[Music] Cloud is a godsend\
for data scientists. Primarily because you're\
able to take [the] your data, take your information\
and put it in the Cloud, put it in a central\
storage system. It allows you to bypass the physical limitations of the computers and\
the systems you're using and it allows you to deploy the analytics and\
storage capacities of advanced machines that\
do not necessarily have to be your machine or your\
company's machine. Cloud allows you not just\
to store large amounts of data on servers somewhere\
in California or in Nevada, but it also allows you to deploy very advanced computing\
algorithms and the ability to do high-performance computing using machines that\
are not yours. Think of it as you have some information,\
you can't store it, so you send it to storage space, let's call it Cloud, and the algorithms\
that you need to use, you don't have them with you. But then on the Cloud, you have those\
algorithms available. So What you do is you deploy\
those algorithms on very large datasets and you're able to do it even\
though your own systems, your own machines, your\
own computing environments were not allowing you to do so. So Cloud is beautiful. The other thing that Cloud is beautiful for is that it allows multiple entities to work with same data at the same time. You can be working\
with the same data that your colleagues in say Germany and another team in India and another team in Ghana, they are collectively working and they're able to do so\
because the information, and the algorithms,\
and the tools, and the answers, and the results, whatever they needed is\
available at a central place, which we call Cloud.\
Cloud is beautiful. Using the Cloud enables you\
to get instant access to open source technologies\
like Apache Spark without the need to install\
and configure them locally. Using the Cloud also gives you access to the most\
up-to-date tools and libraries without the worry of maintaining them and ensuring\
that they are up to date. The Cloud is accessible from everywhere and in\
every time zone. You can use cloud-based\
technologies from your laptop,\
from your tablet, and even from your phone, enabling collaboration more\
easily than ever before. Multiple collaborators or teams can access the data\
simultaneously, working together on\
producing a solution. Some big tech companies\
offer Cloud platforms, allowing you to\
become familiar with cloud-based technologies in\
a pre-built environment. IBM offers the IBM Cloud, Amazon offers Amazon\
Web Services or AWS, and Google offers\
Google Cloud platform. IBM also provides Skills\
Network labs or SN labs to learners registered at any of the learning portals on the\
IBM Developer Skills Network, where you have access to tools like Jupyter Notebooks and Spark clusters so you can create your own data science project\
and develop solutions. With practice and familiarity, you will discover how\
the Cloud dramatically enhances productivity\
for data scientists. [Music]\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 What Makes Someone a Data Scientist?\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 Now that you know what is in the book, it is time to put down some definitions. Despite their ubiquitous use, consensus evades the notions of Big data and Data Science. The question,\'a0Who is a data scientist?\'a0is very much alive and being contested by individuals, some of whom are merely interested in protecting their discipline or academic turfs. In this section, I attempt to address these controversies and explain Why a narrowly construed definition of either Big data or Data science will result in excluding hundreds of thousands of individuals who have recently turned to the emerging field.\
Everybody loves a data scientist,\'a0wrote Simon Rogers (2012) in the Guardian. Mr. Rogers also traced the newfound love for number crunching to a quote by Google's Hal Varian, who declared that\'a0the sexy job in the next ten years will be statisticians.\
Whereas Hal Varian named statisticians sexy, it is widely believed that what he really meant were data scientists. This raises several important questions:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf2 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\'95	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 What is data science?\uc0\u8232 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\'95	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 How does it differ from statistics?\uc0\u8232 \
\ls1\ilvl0\kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 {\listtext	\'95	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 What makes someone a data scientist?\uc0\u8232 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 In the times of big data, a question as simple as,\'a0What is data science?\'a0can result in many answers. In some cases, the diversity of opinion on these answers borders on hostility.\
I define a data scientist as someone who finds solutions to problems by analyzing Big or small data using appropriate tools and then tells stories to communicate her findings to the relevant stakeholders. I do not use the data size as a restrictive clause. A data below a certain arbitrary threshold does not make one less of a data scientist. Nor is my definition of a data scientist restricted to particular analytic tools, such as machine learning. As long as one has a curious mind, fluency in analytics, and the ability to communicate the findings, I consider the person a data scientist.\
I define data science as something that data scientists do. Years ago, as an engineering student at the University of Toronto, I was stuck With the question: What is engineering? I wrote my master's thesis on forecasting housing prices and my doctoral dissertation on forecasting homebuilders' choices related to What they build, when they build, and where they build new housing. In the civil engineering department, Others were working on designing buildings, bridges, tunnels, and worrying about the stability of slopes. My work, and that of my supervisor, was not your traditional garden-variety engineering. Obviously, I was repeatedly asked by others whether my research was indeed engineering.\
When I shared these concerns with my doctoral supervisor, Professor Eric Miller, he had a laugh. Dr Miller spent a lifetime researching urban land use and transportation and had earlier earned a doctorate from MIT.\'a0"Engineering is what engineers do,"\'a0he responded. Over the next 17 years, I realized the wisdom in his statement. You first become an engineer by obtaining a degree and then registering with the local professional body that regulates the engineering profession. Now you are an engineer. You can dig tunnels; write software codes; design components of an iPhone or a supersonic jet. You are an engineer. And when you are leading the global response to a financial crisis in your role as the chief economist of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), as Dr Raghuram Rajan did, you are an engineer.\
Professor Raghuram Rajan did his first degree in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology. He pursued economics in graduate studies, later became a professor at a prestigious university, and eventually landed at the IMF. He is currently serving as the 23rd Governor of the Reserve Bank of India. Could someone argue that his intellectual prowess is rooted only in his training as an economist and that the fundamentals he learned as an engineering student played no role in developing his problem-solving abilities?\
Professor Rajan is an engineer. So are Xi Jinping, the President of the People's Republic of China, and Alexis Tsipras, the Greek Prime Minister who is forcing the world to rethink the fundamentals of global economics. They might not be designing new circuitry, distillation equipment, or bridges, but they are helping build better societies and economies and there can be no better definition of engineering and engineers\'97that is, individuals dedicated to building better economies and societies.\
So briefly, I would argue that data science is what data scientists do.\
Others have many different definitions. In September 2015, a co-panelist at a meetup organized by BigDataUniversity.com in Toronto confined data science to machine learning. There you have it. If you are not using the black boxes that makeup machine learning, as per some experts in the field, you are not a data scientist. Even if you were to discover the cure to a disease threatening the lives of millions, turf-protecting colleagues will exclude you from the data science club.\
Dr Vincent Granville (2014), an author on data science, offers certain thresholds to meet to be a data scientist. On pages 8 and 9 in Developing Analytic talent, Dr Granville describes the new data science professor as a non-tenured instructor at a non-traditional university, who publishes research results in online blogs, does not waste time writing grants, works from home, and earns more money than the traditional tenured professors. Suffice it to say that the thriving academic community of data scientists might disagree with Dr Granville.\
Dr Granville uses restrictions on data size and methods to define what data science is. He defines a data scientist as one who can\'a0easily process a So-million-row data set in a couple of hours,\'a0and who distrusts (statistical) models. He distinguishes data science from statistics. Yet he lists algebra, calculus, and training in probability and statistics as necessary background\'a0to understand data science\'a0(page 4).\
Some believe that big data is merely about crossing a certain threshold on data size or the number of observations, or is about the use of a particular tool, such as Hadoop. Such arbitrary thresholds on data size are problematic because, with innovation, even regular computers and off-the-shelf software have begun to manipulate very large data sets. Stata, a commonly used software by data scientists and statisticians, announced that one could now process between 2 billion to 24.4 billion rows using its desktop solutions. If Hadoop is the password to the big data club, Stata's ability to process 24.4 billion rows, under certain limitations, has just gatecrashed that big data party.\
It is important to realize that one who tries to set arbitrary thresholds to exclude others is likely to run into inconsistencies. The goal should be to define data science in a more exclusive, discipline- and platform-independent, size-free context where data-centric problem solving and the ability to weave strong narratives take center stage.\
Given the controversy, I would rather consult others to see how they describe a data scientist. Why don't we again consult the Chief Data Scientist of the United States? Recall Dr Patil told the\'a0Guardian\'a0newspaper in 2012 that\'a0a data scientist is that unique blend of skills that can both unlock the insights of data and tell a fantastic story via the data.\'a0What is admirable about Dr Patil's definition is that it is inclusive of individuals of various academic backgrounds and training, and does not restrict the definition of a data scientist to a particular tool or subject it to a certain arbitrary minimum threshold of data size.\
The other key ingredient for a successful data scientist is a behavioral trait: curiosity. A data scientist has to be one with a very curious mind, willing to spend significant time and effort to explore her hunches. In journalism, the editors call it having the nose for news. Not all reporters know where the news lies. Only those Who have the nose for news get the Story. Curiosity is equally important for data scientists as it is for journalists.\
Rachel Schutt is the Chief Data Scientist at News Corp. She teaches a data science course at Columbia University. She is also the author of an excellent book, Doing Data Science. In an interview With the New York Times, Dr Schutt defined a data scientist as someone who is a part computer scientist, part software engineer, and part statistician (Miller, 2013). But that's the definition of an average data scientist.\'a0"The best", she contended,\'a0"tend to be really curious people, thinkers who ask good questions and are O.K. dealing with unstructured situations and trying to find structure in them."
\f1\fs32 \
}